the go ahead to a third river
crossing in Great Yarmouth.
It will be in the south
of the town and will make it
easier to reach the port.
It will cost £120 million and
work should start early next year.
That’s all for me. Alex has the
weather. Good night.
Hello.
We’ve been gradually eased
into autumn weather,
but over the next 2A hours,
it’s going to turn much colder,
with a cold northerly wind and some
more scattered showers around.
Now, overnight tonight,
there will be some further showers,
the odd heavy one, then dry
for a time before we see another
area of showery rain
moving in from the north—west.
It will be accompanied
by a freshening northwesterly wind,
so certainly quite blustery
conditions by the end of the night.
During the course of the night,
some clear spells will allow our
temperatures to drop to
around 6 or 7 degrees.
So, low pressure still
on the scene for tomorrow.
It pulls away to the east,
establishing this northerly wind,
so expect a blustery forecast,
some scattered showers
in the morning.
They will gradually clear away,
confining themselves mainly
to eastern counties.
The West looking largely
dry but still blustery,
and the potential there for
A0 mile an hour wind gusts.
It’s going to feel cold,
12 or 13 degrees.
It will feel colder still
in that northerly wind.
In a moment, the national
weather’s coming up,
but here’s the outlook.
And still windy to start
the weekend, with some
further showers to come.
Hello there. If you went outside on
Thursday you might have noticed the
weather feeling
weatherfeeling more
Thursday you might have noticed the
weather feeling more autumnal but
was it really cold enough for snow?
Not really, no. This was a massive
hailstorm that went through Bradford
and Otley, turning the roads and
and Oﬂey, turning the roads and
pavements
and Otley, turning the roads and
pavements white with accumulations
of hail. It must have been quite a
thunderstorm to do that. We have
loads more showers overnight, low
pressure in England slowly moving
towards the North Sea with loads of
showers around. Pembrokeshire and
Cornwall picking up some
particularly heavy showers. A few
particularty heavy showers. A few
for
particularly heavy showers. A few
for Northern Ireland, Scotland
seeing some clearer skies and a
seeing some dearer skies and a
touch of
seeing some clearer skies and a
touch of frost in some of the
sheltered valleys in Scotland.
Another cold night. Tomorrow, it’s a
day broadly speaking of sunshine and
showers but we have lengthy
outbreaks of rain across eastern
areas and some very strong northerly
areas and some very strong northerty
winds.
areas and some very strong northerly
winds. Around the north—east coast
winds. Around the north-east coast
in East Anglia
winds. Around the north—east coast
in East Anglia we could see winds
gusting to 60 odd miles an hour and
gusting to 60 odd milas an hour and
they could be
gusting to 60 odd miles an hour and
they could be strong enough to bring
down a tree or two so they could be
localised transport disruption and
localised transport dismption and
if not
localised transport disruption and
if not from the strong winds, from
the rain which will mount up. A
particularty
particularly miserable feeling day.
particularty miserabla feeling day.
11-14 C,
particularly miserable feeling day.
11—14 C, factor in the winds and it
11-14 C, factor in the winds and it
will feel a
11—14 C, factor in the winds and it
will feel a lot colder than it did
on Thursday. Looking at Saturday the
northerty
northerly winds are back with us.
northerty winds are back with us.
It’s the
northerly winds are back with us.
It’s the eastern areas that have the
highest chance of seeing showers or
lengthy outbreaks of rain and it’s a
langthy outbreaks of rain and it’s a
cold
lengthy outbreaks of rain and it’s a
cold start to the day. Temperature
is below average for the
Guilty of murdering 15 patients...
The Bollywood film actressjiah Khan
has been found dead at her home...
..JihadiJohn is believed
to be dead.
Somebody’s got the answers.
Good morning, it’s Radio1 Breakfast
with Greg James.
I like listening to Greg
at 7am exactly.
I like listening to Greg so much,
I take him with me to work!
I like listening while teaching
my stepdaughter to drive.
GEARS CRUNCH
While being there for Stephanie.
Hiya
,Gre
Hi! 9!
I’m...on the radio.
Get packing, everyone,
we’re heading to the tower.
As we relive some of the moments
that rocked our world.
It’s Blackpool!
It’s the sparkliest show in town.
I have never felt as nervous and as
scared about anything in my life.
Here we go! No, no, no, no!
What a weapon!
lam flying!
Don’t tell me not to worry.
I’m very worried.
I’m just going to go
and give myself a quick wet wipe.
I hope they’ve been in the fridge.
Sarah! That’s Edie.
This is Bella.
Pharrell. Lily.
Nicola.
Caitlin. My son.
It’s my girlfriend.
My husband. My brother.
My wife—to—be.
He was a miracle. Made my heart
beat. Been going out for two years.
He’s the heir to my throne.
Hejust grew on me. She’s my life.
why don’t you have a picture of me?
Erm...
Just the way that she says things
are funny! She’s amazing.
He’s just been there for
every pivotal moment of my life.
Protect YOUR loved ones.
Get the app.
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Alok Sharma,
minister under Theresa May, promoted
to cabinet by Boris
to cabinet by BorisJohnson then
to cabinet by Boris johnson then
appointed
to cabinet by BorisJohnson then
appointed Secretary of State for
Business, Energy and Industrial
Strategy in February, weeks before
lockdown. Labour
lockdown. Labourshadow
Strategy in February, weeks before
lockdown. Labour shadow secretary
lockdown. labour shadow secretary
for
lockdown. Labour shadow secretary
for Northern Ireland, elected to
Westminster five years ago at age
27.
27, she’s been a member of the
shadow ministerial team ever since,
Louise Haigh. Ed Davey, the new
leader of the Liberal Democrats,
replacing jo
replacing Jo Swinson, formerly
replacing jo Swinson, formerty
Energy and
replacing Jo Swinson, formerly
Energy and Climate Change Secretary
Energy and (limate Change Secretary
in the
Energy and Climate Change Secretary
in the 2010 coalition government
under David Cameron. Joining us down
under David Cameron. joining us down
the line
under David Cameron. Joining us down
the line from Edinburgh, Devi
Sridhar, professor of global public
health at Edinburgh university and a
member of the Scottish Government’s
corona visor —— coronavirus advisory
corona visor -- coronavirus advisory
committee, and
corona visor —— coronavirus advisory
committee, and founder and boss of
Oakman Inns, Peter Borg—Neal. Good
Oakman Inns, Peter Borg-Neal. Good
evening and
Oakman Inns, Peter Borg—Neal. Good
evening and welcome to my guests in
the studio and to Devi Sridhar.
Thank you for
Thank you forjoining us down the
Thank you for joining us down the
line. We
Thank you forjoining us down the
line. We have our live audience with
us again virtually. This evening you
are all from Chingford, so hello.
Good to have you with us. Let’s hear
what you have to say. For all of you
watching at home, you can
watching at home, you canjoin in
watching at home, you ranjoin in
the
watching at home, you canjoin in
the conversation on social media at
BBC Question Time. Let’s get going
with our
with ourfirst question,
BBC Question Time. Let’s get going
with our first question, which
with ourfirst question, which is
with our first question, which is
from
with ourfirst question, which is
from Sinem Ishlek. How does the new
from Sinem Ishlak. How does the new
job Support
from Sinem Ishlek. How does the new
Job Support Scheme help those who
job Support Scheme help those who
still
Job Support Scheme help those who
still have their industry shut or
massively reduced because of the
pandemic? We heard about the
pandemic? We heard about theJob
pandemic? We heard about the job
Support
pandemic? We heard about theJob
Support Scheme today from the
Chancellor. It was welcome to see
the Chancellor announced some of the
measures today. Labour has been
measures today. labour has been
falling for
measures today. Labour has been
calling for several months now for
falling for several months now for
the furlough
calling for several months now for
the furlough scheme to be extended
in a targeted and specific way to
address exactly the industries you
have just mentioned, those
industries which are still not able
to be up and running because of
to be up and mnning because of
social
to be up and running because of
social distancing and lockdown
measures. Do you think this goes far
enough in terms of industries which
have been shut or massively reduced?
No, there are not the measures for
those industries that are not yet
viable because the law doesn’t allow
them to be, there are not measures
for people that are self—employed
for peopla that are self-employed
and
for people that are self—employed
and cannot get back to work, and we
have to be honest and recognise
there is a jobs
there is 3 jobs crisis here and now.
there is a jobs crisis here and now.
750,000
there is 3 jobs crisis here and now.
750,000 people have lost their
750,000 people have lost theirjobs
750,000 peopla have lost theirjobs
already this
750,000 people have lost theirjobs
already this year. That 750,000
personal tragedies, and I didn’t
hear anything from the Chancellor
today about retraining or about
creating new
creating newjobs and, with the
measures as they are, not being
anywhere near significant enough to
protect against a second wave of
protect against a second wave ofjob
losses, I would say increasing an
implement is inevitable. So would
labour
Labour do more and spend more? Yes,
labour do more and spend more? Yes,
we need a
Labour do more and spend more? Yes,
we need a retraining programme and
targeted, specific support for those
sectors, because frankly there is a
of not doing this. There is a cost
at the end of this anyway. Yes, and
that is why we have already borrowed
a significant amount, because this
pandemic is significant and we have
to match the scale of action with
the scale of the challenge and
acknowledge that, as well as saving
lives, we have to save livelihoods.
Peter, you won a change of pubs,
upmarket pubs and restaurants. ——
upmarket pubs and restaurants. --
you mn. Do you
upmarket pubs and restaurants. ——
you run. Do you think this goes far
you mn. Do you think this goes far
enough? will it
you run. Do you think this goes far
enough? Will it help you? Our
business is doing well, and what the
Chancellor has done this year has
been very positive for my entire
industry and certainly very good for
Oakman Inns, my business. However, I
would urge the Chancellor to look
again at some detail and look at
sectors on a granular basis. To pick
“P
up one example, because there are
several parts of the hospitality
industry which will continue to
stmggle. If
struggle. If you take nightclubs,
stmggle. If you take nightclubs,
so... They
struggle. If you take nightclubs,
so... They have been shut
throughout. They are not allowed to
open. Been preparing to open.
open. Been preparing to open. I
spoke to the chief executive of a
professional nightclub company today
and he has been preparing to open,
investing in capital, he has kept
his team on, he has brought people
his team on, he has brought peopla
off furlough to
his team on, he has brought people
off furlough to prepare the
marketing and make sure everything
is Covid secure. So this is no use
to him. None at all. But I hope the
government will be looking further.
They have had to do a lot in a short
period of time, but if a business is
not allowed to open, it’s surely
still a viable business afterwards,
still a viabla business afterwards,
when it
still a viable business afterwards,
when it can open, so
when it can open, sol
still a viable business afterwards,
when it can open, so I think you
when it ran open, so I think you
have to
when it can open, so I think you
have to separate a business which is
never going to succeed again, but
Peter Marks’s
Peter Marks’s customers are ready to
come back, they want to come back.
If the government, for public health
reasons, will not allow nightclubs
to open, I guess it can get to
understand that, but there must be
support so these businesses are
still there to reopen, and they are
a big part of the economy, in due
course. You could also talk about
theatres and life events, all sorts
of companies, industries, rather.
Catherine, you have your hand up.
I’d like to agree with what the
gentleman has just said about the
government may be needing to look at
the industries in a more granular
lavel. My
level. My company is a company which
lavel. My company is a company which
provides a day
level. My company is a company which
provides a day service for adults
over 50 with disabilities, and my
company is closed at the moment and
the clients that we have are not
offered any provision and haven’t
been offered any provision since the
lockdown started. It’s my company ——
lockdown started. It’s my company --
is my company not
lockdown started. It’s my company ——
is my company not viable and, if so,
is my company not viabla and, if so,
what happens to
is my company not viable and, if so,
what happens to these people in the
long term? These people now are
suffering from, in many cases, being
suffering from, in many rases, being
isolated. They
suffering from, in many cases, being
isolated. They don’t always have
family or friends that can keep in
family or friends that ran keep in
touch
family or friends that can keep in
touch with them, and the day centre
was a bit of a lifeline for them, so
what happens to them in future? I
wanted to reiterate those two
points.
points. It’s such an ambiguous
thing, and this is the whole point
thing, and this is the whola point
of what
thing, and this is the whole point
of what we talk about in dialogue
with the public, when you say viable
with the public, when you say viabla
job, what they
with the public, when you say viable
job, what they mean?
job, what they mean? I think there
is a big problem here, that there is
going to be a whole generation of
going to be a whola generation of
peopla that
going to be a whole generation of
people that are going to be thrown
peopla that are going to be thrown
onto the pila
people that are going to be thrown
onto the pile of trash by missing
onto the pila of trash by missing
out on
onto the pile of trash by missing
out on the scheme, and it’s going to
really, really damage the economy,
it’s going to damage the country’s
it’s going to damage the countrrs
future
it’s going to damage the country’s
future prospects, we are going to be
losing all of those future tax
revenues that we need to actually
start to grow the economy again in
another six or 12 months or a couple
of years down the line. We are going
to need all of these creative
industries and the nightclub
industry and the social industries
that actually drive our UK economy,
a consumer led economy. We need to
PWP “P
prop up these industries, because
that will prop up the long—term
that will prop up the long-term
recovery of
that will prop up the long—term
recovery of the economy in the
future. What do you say, Alok
future. what do you say, Alok
Sharma?
future. What do you say, Alok
Sharma? We have had three people
from the audience, and Rishi Sunak
made it quite clear this support was
for peopla
for people with the viable jobs, but
for peopla with the viabla jobs, but
jobs that are
for people with the viable jobs, but
jobs that are not viable now, like
jobs that are not viabla now, like
theatres
jobs that are not viable now, like
theatres and nightclubs, will become
viabla again
viable again we are through this? I
viabla again we are through this? I
spend
viable again we are through this? I
spend every day talking to
businesses, business organisations,
and I know it’s very difficult for
lots of sectors will stop we do
understand that. I think what we
have seen from the Chancellor today
is a set of measures which have been
very welcomed by business, and the
CBI describing them as a decisive
set of measures. If you look at
those individual measures, yes, they
are there to support people coming
are there to support peopla coming
back into
are there to support people coming
back into work, but they are also an
extension of the loan schemes in
terms of the time limits on those,
in terms of how long people have to
in terms of how long peopla have to
pay back the
in terms of how long people have to
pay back the loans they have taken.
We talk about individual sectors, we
had this discussion earlier, there
had this discussion eartier, there
has been
had this discussion earlier, there
has been targeted support. If you
look at the hospitality and leisure
look at the hospitality and loisure
sector,
look at the hospitality and leisure
sector, they have a one year holiday
when it comes to rates. That is
continuing. The Chancellor has
announced a set of measures in terms
of allowing people longer to pay
of allowing peopla longer to pay
their
of allowing people longer to pay
their VAT deferrals. There are a
whole range of things, and this
whola range of things, and this
builds
whole range of things, and this
builds on the almost £200 billion of
support where we have helped 12
million people stay in work. What
million peopla stay in work. what
about
million people stay in work. What
about the point made by the audience
that the jobs that cannot exist,
even on a part—time basis at the
even on a part-time basis at the
moment,
even on a part—time basis at the
moment, because of restrictions we
are in, which the government has
imposed on us, those
imposed on us, thosejobs are not
imposed on us, those jobs are not
viabla now
imposed on us, thosejobs are not
viable now but they will come back.
viabla now but they will come back.
So will
viable now but they will come back.
So will those people be thrown on
So will those peopla be thrown on
the
So will those people be thrown on
the scrapheap? That is not obviously
the intention at all. But is that
not the outcome? Support is
available for those, and the
furlough scheme is continuing until
the end of October. But after that.
In the creative industries, there is
a £1.5
3 £1.5 million
In the creative industries, there is
a £1.5 million package put forward
after that,
3 £1.5 million package put forward
afterthat, but
a £1.5 million package put forward
after that, but the other point is,
and Louise talked about
traineeships, if you look at what
the Chancellor announced in his
summer statement, there was £30
summer statement, there was 50
billion of
summer statement, there was £30
billion of support for green jobs,
support for traineeships, support
for young people through the
kick—start scheme, support for
apprenticeships. There is a lot we
are doing, one, to support people
are doing, one, to support peopla
who are in
are doing, one, to support people
who are in work now, so they can
who are in work now, so they ran
come back,
who are in work now, so they can
come back, even for a small
percentage of time, but then also
ensuring that we are supporting the
creation of new
creation of newjobs and helping
creation of new jobs and helping
peopla to
creation of newjobs and helping
people to get retrained.
May I make a point
about the bank debt?
So, I spoke to another industry
colleague today and he had agreed
a CBil which enabled him to keep
on funding his business,
without the help of furlough, long
enough for when the restrictions
are lifted, he could reopen,
but of course it was right
at the last stage, and the bank
told him today, because of
the new government restrictions,
we don’t think this is a good bet
any more, you won’t be getting it.
So he is completely stranded now.
And not sure what to do next, so,
again, I don’t want to be
overly critical, Alok,
I’m just asking you to go back
and look at some specific detail,
for notjust my sector,
but for similarly affected sectors.
There is a difference
between a business that is not
viable, because customers don’t
want to use it and one
that is not allowed
to operate, or there are laws
restricting its operation in such
a way, that it is not
economic to operate.
If I mayjust come back
on the point, the start
of that process, I,
the Chancellor and others...
Everyone who is not familiar
with that acronym, CBils...
It is the coronavirus business
interruption and loan scheme,
it is one of the loan schemes
we have introduced and over
a million businesses have been
supported through the bounce back
loans and other schemes as well.
What we have been very keen on,
is to continue to impress
upon the banks, they need to support
businesses and I was being very
clear in the House, in terms
of press conferences that took place
at Downing Street, that this
is a time for the banks
to step up and support
and there is an underwritten
guarantee from the government
as well, when it comes,
up to 80%.
I cannot comment on individual
cases, but the fact that we have
seen over a million businesses now
supported through loan schemes
suggests that it is working.
I understand, there will be people
that fall through the gaps.
Iqbal.
Hi there.
I was just thinking
about the term viable business.
A friend of mine is self—employed,
he is basically a one—man limited
company, he was not eligible for any
help in their furlough scheme,
so he is living off his savings
for about six months.
Rishi’s new scheme is also not
going to give him anything,
so again he has got to keep relying
upon his savings.
Itjust seems very unfair that
because he is deemed
a non—viable business,
that even though he is not
claiming benefits and he has
always been employed,
that he could end up
losing his business and having
to have a complete rethink
of what he does when all this has
happened and yet, in the past,
self—employed companies have been
able to take grants,
even if their own business
was booming at the time.
Who decides what is viable?
Well, if we talk about the self
employment scheme...
Briefly, because I have
everybody else here as well.
Of course, I am sorry.
No, no, no, is Rishi Sunak deciding
what is a viable business?
Are you deciding?
I think, just going back
to the point about the self
employment scheme, of course
there is additional support
that the Chancellor announced today.
Who is deciding what
is a viable business?
Ultimately, it is where businesses
are bringing people back to work
and they are spending at least
a third of their time in employment
and the scheme will work
on the basis that you are in work,
being paid by your employer
for at least a third of the time
and then the rest of the wage bill
is effectively shared between you,
the employer and the government.
It is whether the company believes
it is worth the investment.
Richard.
Thanks, Fiona.
A question for both Alok and Louise,
since they have both
mentioned retraining.
How is that supposed to happen
in a socially distanced environment,
before people get back to some
sort of normality?
I can imagine apprenticeship schemes
and things like that
are going to rely more on practical
hands—on face—to—face
contact and communication,
rather than being able
to do stuff virtually.
So, it is a question on how training
can operate and apprenticeships can
operate in this current environment.
Because we haven’t yet heard
from the rest of the panel,
I am going to keep going round,
Richard, if you forgive me.
Ed.
Thanks, Fiona.
I have been talking to a lot
of businesses, a lot of people over
the last few weeks and months
and I have never seen the level
of anxiety that we have got.
People are really worried that
their businesses are going to fold,
that they are going to lose
theirjobs and while,
like Louise, I welcome some
of the packages today,
I just don’t think it goes
anywhere near far enough.
Take the example that Iqbal
mentioned, there are a lot
of self—employed people who got
nothing in the previous
support package.
Over a million people
who are excluded, they
are not covered today.
So what would you do differently?
Well, you should bring them
into the self employment scheme
that was there and it
should be more generous.
Talking about Peter,
he is quite right, there
are a number of sectors,
I would include nurseries,
I would include tourism,
sectors that are just not able
to operate and they are viable
businesses and it is just not good
enough for the Secretary of State
to say they are going to forget
them, because why should these
businesses, why should these people
lose theirjobs,
lose their businesses,
because of the random impact
of a virus?
We have got to build back.
I can see no long—term
strategy for the government.
They made a mistake as well.
They thought that Covid would be
over by now and they introduce
something called thejob retention
bonus, £9 billion,
which is going to be paid out
at the end of this year.
They could have chosen to use that
money, instead of this game
that they thought would be useful,
but put it back into
the scheme today.
They could have therefore
been far more generous,
include the people I’m talking
about, who have been excluded,
not got the help they need,
and it could have run
for a lot longer.
That is what we have seen
in places like Germany,
and France and Austria,
countries who are really getting
behind their businesses and helping
them through real distress and I’m
afraid the government
really has failed.
Devi.
Yeah, I do wonder if we are looking
at the problem the wrong way,
because the idea has been that
you have your economic issues here,
you have your public health problem
there and they are in opposition
to each other, but if we look
at GDP performance,
for the second quarter of 2020,
what you notice is the countries
that control the virus
quite tightly, Taiwan,
South Korea, even you know,
Finland, Norway, there
GDP has been minimal, less than 5%.
Taiwan is practically the same
economically in the countries that
didn’t control the virus,
like the United States, the UK,
Spain, are taking upwards of 20%,
as well as, you know,
thousands of deaths, in the States,
hundreds of thousands of deaths.
The question in my mind is,
we are entering this
level of restrictions,
would it not be better instead
to actually follow East Asia,
follow the model of strong
suppression, possibly elimination,
and you get rid of your virus,
you have a full domestic recovery,
and then you can get back to
actually business recovering fully.
What I’m hearing from senior
economists, who I work with,
that unless you solve your public
health problem, you’re not
going to your economic problems
and we still have a substantial
public health problem
and economic problem currently.
I think that is exactly right.
One of the real problems we have had
with this government
is that they have acted too slowly,
they have been inefficient,
they have said they are going
to have an trace and isolation
strategy, just the way that
other countries have had,
working with local government,
they have just not done that.
That has created the problems
for businesses and why
we are in the mess that we are.
We have got Alok, forgive me,
we have got a question on that,
so I am just going to move this on.
Iqbal.
What is your question?
Hi there.
Are the new measures a short step
away from full lockdown again,
as this is what happened
the first time around,
with more and more restrictions
happening almost every day?
Peter, I am going to
come to you on that.
You were at the sharp
end in terms of
the effect that restrictions would
have and if a full lockdown is just
around the corner.
Well, we were relieved
that this bizarre kind of
circuit breaker idea
kind of went away.
You thought it was bizarre?
Yeah.
I think, you know, the approach,
you have to deal with
public health, there is no doubt
about that and, you know, no one
should think the business would ever
put profits before people’s safety,
because it is just not true.
And certainly not in my industry.
You know, we have
been quite frustrated
that the government has felt
the need to impose traditional
lockdowns and I would like to refer
back to
the shenanigans last week
from Matt Hancock,...
Shenanigans!
Shenanigans.
I mean, he came on to the radio four
today programme, it
was about 815 last Friday and tried
to imply that the major cause for
the increase in transmissions
was the hospitality industry.
I mean, it is just totally untrue.
Very, very misleading.
You know, we opened onJuly
the 4th, you know, eight or
nine weeks went by, there has been
no significant change in the number
of transmissions.
Then, at the beginning
of September, there is a
big change, how on earth could that
be blamed on the hospitality
industry?
We are very angry.
We want a retraction
and an apology and if
we don’t get one, this
issue will not go away.
People are really,
really hurt and upset.
We sweated blood to get
ready to reopen our
businesses.
We worked really hard to make our
premises Covid secure from
day one.
Now, I have served one and a half
million people since we have
opened, not one has got Covid.
The government’s
figures, Public Health
England figures, made it very clear
that week 37, which was the week
before we spoke, number one, Arena
for transmissions, kept in their
before we spoke, number one,
Arena for transmissions, care
homes, numbertwo, educational
settings, number three, workplaces.
They said they don’t believe
it is happening in the workplace.
It is in hospitality.
And then they sent out
Dominic Raab the other day and
when he was pressed he kind of said,
well we think it is kind of
asymptomatic, so we think it is
actually happening, even though our
own figures say it is not.
I mean, poor Dominic,
it is not his fault,
you know, they sent him
out to kind of face us.
Just to be clear, so the Public
Health England figures, as
you suggest, to the week of the 13th
of September, suggest a 508
confirmed outbreaks,
5% were in food outlets,
including restaurants
and
pubs.
Can Ijust ask you, what do you make
of the ten o’clock curfew?
Good idea, bad idea?
I think it is a poor idea,
but not from a business
perspective.
I’m not too worried.
In the sense of, my particular
business, it is not going to really
be impacted that much.
It is just a bit absurd.
I have a vicar that comes
to one of our places for
supper, Evensong, every week,
he sort of sits down about ten
to nine, he has something to eat.
Now, as I understand it,
if the vicar hasn’t
finished his chocolate souffle
at ten o’clock, I am going to have
I am going to have to frogmarch him
out of the premises.
I mean, it isjust
heavy—handed and silly.
Hang on a minute, no
one is suggesting...
In fairness, that you would have
to frogmarched him out.
Just make it clear at ten o’clock
he would have to go.
But really, now, the problem
here is if everyone
walks out at ten o’clock,
that is quite dangerous.
What you want is a kind of gradual
dispersal of people,
so I would encourage the government
to look again at the detail.
I don’t agree with the
curfew, but if there
is going to be one, let’s do it
in a sensible fashion.
We refer to Belgium,
that is the Antwerp model,
that was an 1130 curfew and actually
at 1130 you had to stop serving
drinks and you had time
to drink up and leave
in a civilised fashion,
so
it is a poor idea.
Yeah?
And I think they need
to look at it again.
Devi let us just come back
to the question specifically,
are the new measures a short step
away from a
full lockdown again,
with more and more restrictions
happening almost every few days,
because you are
speaking to us from Edinburgh, and
you have different restrictions up
there and I am thinking particularly
in terms of household mixing.
Yes, the idea was to
move early, to move
aggressively and to get a check
on it and we are not even sure these
measures will be enough yet to
really take handle, especially as we
have had universities
returning and a number
of outbreaks in students.
I guess the larger
point I would make
is that we are not going back
to 2019, there is no normal anywhere
across the world.
Every country is living
under different kinds of
restrictions and in a way, we need
to move away from the lockdown
language and get into
degree of restrictions.
Every country is making a choice.
If you look at East Asia
and the Pacific, those
countries have said,
we want to get back
to normal, live music,
full
sports stadiums, you know, concerts,
all the things you can have, if you
eliminate the virus and you have
strong border checks.
They accept the trade
off, they cannot travel
abroad.
And you look at Europe and you’re
seen these night—time
curfews, indoor hospitality shot,
basically going after riskier
settings, assuming the virus
is circulating and you’re trying to
stop super spreading events.
That means you cannot
have this kind of
events, because too many
people become infected.
I guess, we need to have
a functional testing, tracing
and isolating scheme and the latest
figures show it is truly a broken
system currently, so
in a way, there is no
other way to suppress
the
virus apart from keeping
people away from each
other, and the longer
the
government delays in trying to get
that system up and running, the more
likely we are to end up
in another lockdown.
Because if you just let the virus
run its course, like what
has happened in Israel, the first
developed country to go back into
national lockdown, the problem is
that your hospital start filling up,
the ICUs start filling up and at .6
case the talent he rate starts
creeping up over one or 2%, people
arrive to hospital and cannot get
oxygen, cannot get treatment, cannot
get ventilators, and so governments
are kind of forced into a national
lockdown to help the health care
capacity need and that means other
services like cancer treatments,
surgeries, they get
backlogged, and we end up
in a repeat of March
and
that is what we are trying to avoid,
by keeping the virus at low levels,
right now, before we get into that
really difficult position.
0K, we have got some hands up.
Neil.
Thanks.
Just to go back to Ed’s point,
the benefit of hindsight
there.
I think the government
are doing quite well.
I also do not share
the pessimistic views of
business at the moment.
I mean, the construction
industry, we are
attempting to build our
way out of this crisis
and I think doing very well.
I have employed people recently,
the construction industry
is seeing growth,
there are sectors of it
that are closing down,
but
there is also a lot
of sectors opening
and also, Devi, Ithink
the
ifs and buts in relation to your
last statement don’t quite follow
through.
We are not in the same
position that we were at the
beginning of the year.
People are wearing
masks, most business
settings, mine in particular, are
Covid friendly or Covid safe and I
think lots of people are taking
the restrictions very seriously,
so I don’t see us falling back
into the
element of doom and gloom that seems
to be profiting through.
Alex.
With any new measures,
will the government be proactive
or reactive in their response?
You could argue previously,
like in March, the
government was quite reactive,
they have been quite slow and their
response to Corona and I look,
as a student, as Devi was saying,
students they can go to the pubs any
more, they are locked
into their accommodation and I don’t
want that
to happen to me.
I would rather the government
to be upfront and honest,
say what could happen and put
the measures in place before it gets
worse, not when it gets worse
or after it has happened.
So, Alok, are unlikely
to see more restrictions?
Well, nobody, Fiona,
wants to go into a full lockdown.
That is absolutely clear.
What we have done...
Do you think it is
likely that more is
coming down the line?
Well, what we have always
said is that we will
continue to monitor
this on a daily basis
and obviously, if we need
to
act, we will, but I
think the fundamental
point here is that
the
vast majority of people have indeed
followed the rules and actually
businesses have secured their
premises and I have worked with
trade unions, I have
worked with businesses,
to make sure that we have got
the right guidance out
there.
This is something the Prime
Minister, Matt Hancock, yourself,
have said repeatedly over the last
few days and those people are
following the rules and a recent
academic study found that between
May and August, only 18% of people
self isolated after developing
symptoms and 11% were self
isolating after being
told they had been
in
contact with a confirmed case.
Back in April,
it was 50%, it was not
great then either.
What makes you so sure that
people are following the
rules 7
You talk about Test and Trace,
there are almost half a
million people now who,
through that system,
have self isolated,
who
would otherwise have been
putting others at risk.
How can you be sure...
I am just looking at those figures,
how can you be sure they
are actually self isolating?
Well, Ithink, you know,
they are obviously
contacted...
I know, that is very different.
I understand that, but I think
there is a process to make
sure that that happens.
Are they being checked up on?
Let me give you an example,
when you are talking
about people not necessarily
following the rules, I mean I come
into London every day by train
and I have actually seen now over
the past few months people are,
by and large,
just about everyone,
is observing the rule
to have face coverings
on
on public transport.
Despite those figures,
are you confident that
people who are being
told to self—isolate
are self isolating,
in
large numbers?
As I said to you, I think
if you look at Test and Trace,
a significant percentage of people
who have been contacted as a result
of somebody else getting
the infection are indeed self
isolating, . . .
Where is the evidence of that?
Louise is asking you
where the evidences?
There is a fundamental
point here also about
the position that we are in
and I think Neil made
a really good point.
We know a lot more about this virus,
we have got a whole set of measures
that are in place and nobody wants
to go into full lockdown, but what
we need is people to continue to
observe the rules and the guidelines
and I do think
the vast majority are.
Louise.
I mean the latest restrictions
and more advanced
lockdown measures are
evidence of only one
thing, that the virus
is
going in the wrong
direction and this
is a very grave moment
for the
country.
We have had 31,000 cases over
the last six days and
hospitalisations and
the death toll rising
again and I think peopla
are
right to ask whether we are back in
the same position as we were earlier
this year, with the government
failing to prepare for a second
lockdown.
The Track and Trace system is not
world heating, it is very far
from it, less than 80% of contacts
are reliably not been reached every
week.
The new figures out today show that
10% of tests are being returned
within 2A hours and
Track and Trace...
That really is incorrect.
That is the ONS
statistics out today.
From all testing roots, 10%,
10.6% have come back within 2A
hours.
The Track and Trace system has been
outsourced to companies
like Serco, Deloitte, GAS,
none of which had any experience
in track and tracing and that is why
so few
are being reached and even fewer
are actually been followed up
to make sure they self—isolate.
And all of this means
that the backbone of the
public health response is not there,
so we cannot ensure the wider
reopening of the economy
unless it is there as well.
We have lost sight of the virus.
And do you think, just coming back
to the question that we
are just a short step away
from a full lockdown?
Well, until we have that
effective public health
response underpinning any
restrictions, whether that is the
Track and Trace system was
the consequence of testing, it was
utterly inevitable that as schools,
universities and workers returned,
that testing demand would increase,
but the government have not
increased testing capacity
since the end ofJune.
Mark, you have got your hand up.
I just want to roll back to a point
that Peter made about the
hospitality and entertainment
industry needing to open and then
Devi made a point
about South East Asia,
they made a trade off
and by
closing their borders and accepting
that they couldn’t travel, they were
able to open up hospitality
and entertainment.
So, if we did that, how
would the holiday industry and
the travel industry react?
You’re not going to
please everyone all of
the time, are you?
Tia.
So, I would just like
to go back to what was
said about people being checked up
on when they come home and are asked
to self—isolate or self—isolate
for other reasons.
So, I got back from France quite
recently, had to fill
in a passenger locator form and was
told I could be checked up on.
I wasn’t, once.
And I know a few other people
who have come back from
France as well, or from other
holidays, who have not been checked
up on and I was self—isolating
in London and I noticed when I came
out of self—isolation that people in
the shops weren’t particularly
wearing masks, even people working
in the shops and the same
on public transport.
Quite a lot of people were,
but also quite a few
were not and I just feel
like if we do not put
anyone in a position,
even just a shop door entrance,
saying, would you mind
putting a mask on,
something like that,
it
does encourage people
to do so and if no
one is checked up on,
it is
all very nice that people have to
understand that they need to do it,
but if no one feels like there
are going to be any repercussions,
why would they, and I think
that is why
there are so many
people not doing it.
Let mejust...
I am sorry, Tia,
I interrupted you, do go on.
I was just going to
say, I think it is
difficult to expect people to do it
if they do not think that there are
going to be any repercussions
from it and, yeah, I think it needs
a bit of encouragement
and it is really
important and you are less likely to
do it if you feel like other people
aren’t and therefore
you are not protected.
Let us just be really clear
and specific on this point
that Tia raises, people who are told
to self—isolate, how do you know
that they are doing it?
Well, there is a follow—up process
that takes place, we have
people who are doing that.
No, don’t move on to something else,
how many people are
followed up?
Tia wasn’t.
As I said you, there
are half a million people
who have been self—isolating
through the Test and Trace system.
And how do you know how many of them
actually are self isolating?
Well, as I said...
How many actually are?
There is a follow—up process
which obviously takes place.
So, does the government
know how many are
actually doing the self—isolating?
Well, Fiona, half a million people,
almost half a million people now
through the test and trace system
have been self isolating.
They have been asked to,
but how do you know they
actually are?
I want to go back to this point
about test and tracing.
If I may, because Louise raised this
point about testing not
increasing, actually capacity has
gone up significantly.
We are almost at 260,000
testing capacity right
now, so the idea...
It was supposed to be
350,000 at the end ofJune.
It has not increased
since the end of
June.
The capacity has indeed gone
up and if you look...
As we have talked up
many times in this
programme, capacity is very
different to the number of people
actually being tested.
Ed.
Fiona, I think people
will be extremely
worried at the moment,
they are worried that there
could be a second lockdown,
they are worried that the
government strategy on testing,
tracing and isolation just is not
working and it is true, Alok,
we have seen the testing,
how that has been sending people
to other parts
of the country, but on the isolation
point that you make, Fiona, that Tia
made, people are not
being checked up on and
the report that you quoted,
you have got to ask why
people are not isolating
when they have been asked to.
First of all, they are not
being checked up on, secondly people
who are desperate to go to work,
they are not giving any support
payments to stay at home.
In Germany, they are.
They are encouraged,
their financial losses
being recompensed.
Let me finish.
You have got no real
strategy on that, nothing
like the Germans have got.
The Germans have been far more
successful and there is another
issue that we have got
to remember, I think
the public lost a lot
of
trust in the government
earlier in this pandemic,
when Dominic Cummings broke
the lockdown rules and paid no
price for that.
That sent a really bad message
and if you are surprised
that people out there aren’t
following all the rules, Alok, I
think you need to talk
to your Prime Minister and say,
why did he not pull
up Dominic Cummings?
There can’t be one
rule for us and one
rule for Boris Johnson’s friends.
Sherry, you have had your
hand up a long time.
Just with regards to the increasing
restrictions, it seems to
be every few days, more
and more restrictions
that are coming in,
I
think a lot of confidence
in the government’s long term
strategy has been lost,
because red lines
have not been laid out.
Everybody senses we are
going in the direction
of a second lockdown,
but with the recent push
towards moving peopla
to
go back to the office
to work, which has now
been reversed, people
are
now being encouraged to work
from home, there is very little
confidence that despite the
government saying we will endeavour
to keep schools open,
that is our priority, I,
as a parent of a school age child,
have no confidence that
that is going to pan out.
How can we see an
evidence—based approach on
the government’s policies?
In terms of restrictions,
moving on and
developing every few
days, as you mention,
let us take a question
on
exactly that from Linda.
Hi, good evening.
My question is regarding Christmas.
Christmas seems to be
cancelled, doesn’t it,
Linda, were not quite sure
what is happening with Christmas.
Go on.
Well, Christmas lunch in a pub,
on tables of six, in separate names,
in order to be able to see my
children and grandchildren
altogether.
That is probably, hopefully,
the next time we can all be
together, as a family.
Is Christmas off!
Ed?
Well, I really hope it isn’t.
It is so important for families
to come together, but we are only
going to save Christmas
if the government get
their act together.
We have been asking,
the Labour Party have been asking,
the opposition parties have been
asking them, to sort out
test trace and isolate.
I am sorry to come back to that,
but it has failed for many reasons.
Let me give you another reason,
in many other countries like Korea,
like Taiwan, like Germany,
the government has trusted the local
authority, the councils,
the local public health officials
and worked with them,
they have been part of a team.
In this government, it has been
all centralised, Whitehall run.
Sometimes local councils haven’t
been given any information
until the last minute,
that is just not acceptable
and if you talk to officials
and public health, they are pretty
cross, because this was a basic
tenet of public health
policy in a pandemic,
that you should have a team
approach, a locally—based approach,
and if you did contact tracing
locally, properly, rather
than through a central core system
with all your private contractors
who are getting all these
nice juicy contracts,
I tell you what, it would workjust
like it is working well
in other countries.
This is the rule of six and you are
This is the mic of six and you are
doing things a
This is the rule of six and you are
doing things a bit differently in
Scotland, it’s the rule of six by
different households cannot meet,
different households rannot meet,
which
different households cannot meet,
which would create problems for
which would create problams for
Linda if
which would create problems for
Linda if that comes to England. What
Linda if that comes to England. what
is it that you
Linda if that comes to England. What
is it that you know or you think you
know in Scotland that means that
different households shouldn’t meet,
which isn’t known or is being done
differently in England? I think the
scientific advice is pretty similar
across the nations and many
countries across the world, and
these are political decisions and
trade—offs of what you are going to
trade-offs of what you are going to
emphasise
trade—offs of what you are going to
emphasise and how you manage the
infection. why
infection. Why do you think Scotland
infection. why do you think Scotland
has
infection. Why do you think Scotland
has taken that approach? The tracing
system is quite robust here and they
found that many of the clusters were
coming from households, indoor
homes, house parties has been a big
problem, so we are trying to break
those chains of transmission. These
kind of restrictions were put into
the west of Scotland 3
the west of Scotland a few weeks
back and they managed to change the
hack and they managed to change the
exponential
back and they managed to change the
exponential into linear growth, so
getting a handle on that, and
getting a handla on that, and
hopefully
getting a handle on that, and
hopefully that can do the same for
hopefully that ran do the same for
the rest
hopefully that can do the same for
the rest of the country. I think the
thing that brings all of these
together is the test, track and
trace. The thing which has been most
seen in the news over the last
couple of weeks has been how much of
a shambles the testing system is in.
People can’t get a test and, when
you can’t get a test, you can’t tell
how many people in the country are
how many peopla in the country are
getting
how many people in the country are
getting the virus. When we can’t
getting the vims. when we can’t
tell who
getting the virus. When we can’t
tell who those people are, they
tell who those peopla are, they
can’t
tell who those people are, they
can’t tell them to isolate. You then
can’t track their known contacts,
ran’t track their known contacts,
and the
can’t track their known contacts,
and the virus is then out of control
again. So
again. Sol
and the virus is then out of control
again. So I think we need to start
to fix the testing system so that we
ran track
can track thereafter and trace
thereafter. It’s really important.
If we don’t fix the testing system
at the moment, then I fear that we
are going to face a second lockdown
and Christmas is going to be
cancelled, and I really hope that
both of those things aren’t true,
but my fear is they are. Peter, you
didn’t wait for the England and
Walas app,
Wales app, which was launched today,
Walas app, which was hunched today,
and it was
Wales app, which was launched today,
and it was much earlier in Northern
and it was much eartier in Northern
Ireland
and it was much earlier in Northern
Ireland and Scotland. You go ahead
and did your own app. We did that
because we wanted to be Covid safe
and enable people to order food and
and enabla peopla to order food and
drink on
and enable people to order food and
drink on our
drink on ourapp.
and enable people to order food and
drink on our app. We quickly
realised that was the way to solve
the contact tracing. So we were able
to do it so every time a customer
comes in, once they have registered
on our app, we know they are there,
so that, if we were to be contacted
by the government and say, look, so
was in your pub, we could work out
who they might have had any form of
contact with. Did you just give up
on the government, in terms of the
tracing app? It was a bit confusing,
and I think it was in May, it was
confirmed it was coming out the
following week, and we are for micro
months on! Hell of a big gap, we had
a responsibility to report our
customers, and it was the easiest
“Y
way of doing it. People who didn’t
have telephones, we took it manually
on a pad, so we have always
compliant Day complied. We help the
government before the regulations. I
do think people should support the
government with these rules in every
government with these mles in every
“Y
way they ran.
government with these rules in every
way they can. Are you worried about
way they ran. Are you worried about
the effect
way they can. Are you worried about
the effect on Christmas, in terms of
bookings? Well, yes, but
bookings? Well, yes, butl
the effect on Christmas, in terms of
bookings? Well, yes, but I think
there is a wider tragedy. Everybody
uses the emotive term of Christmas
being cancelled, and clearly it
being cancelled, and dearty it
isn’t, it’s just
being cancelled, and clearly it
isn’t, it’sjust going
isn’t, it’s just going to
being cancelled, and clearly it
isn’t, it’sjust going to be
different. I don’t think it will be
possibla for
possible for the government to allow
large office parties and stuff, so
we’ll just
we’lljust have
large office parties and stuff, so
we’ll just have to
we’lljust have to suck that up. But
we’ll just have to suck that up. But
I think it
we’lljust have to suck that up. But
I think it would be a
I think it would be areal
we’lljust have to suck that up. But
I think it would be a real shame if
families can’t get together at
Christmas time, so let’s hope that
the measures being put in place will
work, and perhaps some more detailed
work, and perhaps some more detailad
[oral action,
work, and perhaps some more detailed
localaction, because
local action, because I think what
[oral action, because I think what
is needed,
local action, because I think what
is needed, rather than this
centralised command and control,
same for all four parts of the
country, just to look at the detail.
If you compare the Treasury, with
this great execution of everything
that they do, and on the health side
not so good they are failing to
execute, they need to get on top of
it. Louise. Linda, you have a much
bigger family
biggerfamily than mine, and I think
bigger family than mine, and I think
I could fit my
biggerfamily than mine, and I think
I could fit my whole family and my
I could fit my whola family and my
mates on
I could fit my whole family and my
mates on one table of six!
mates on one table of six! Really!
Not so much the family but the
mates! I don’t want to sound like a
broken record, but it really is
getting test, trace and isolate
fixed. This isn’t with the benefit
of hindsight. The World Health
Organisation was clear back in
March, as we were watching the virus
come from China to Italy and this
country, that that system was
necessary as a backbone in our
pub“:
public health response, and the
government stopped tracking and
tracing back in April. It didn’t run
tracing back in April. It didn’t mn
proper testing,
tracing back in April. It didn’t run
propertesting, didn’t
proper testing, didn’t ramp up
testing capacity to where it needs
to be. I think the public are
incredibly sympathetic and I
understand this is very difficult
but, actually, it is pretty simple
to is needed to be done, and it’s
unforgivable that the government is
where it is. The virus is an act of
God, but the incompetence and
failure to address it, they lie
squarely with the government. Can
squarely with the government. (“an
come up lots
squarely with the government. Can
come up lots of hand up. Alan. What
come up lots of hand up. Alan. what
measures
come up lots of hand up. Alan. What
measures will be taken if Christmas
is cancelled, the effect of mental
health in the country will be very
hard, especially for older people,
hard, especially for older peopla,
and
hard, especially for older people,
and the worry I have is that this is
just going to build on top of all
the worries they have for everything
else that’s happening. Peggy. There
have been other references to other
parts of the world, especially Asia,
and I was in Southeast Asia in
january for a
January for a holiday and, since
january for a holiday and, since
returning, I
January for a holiday and, since
returning, I have been following my
lockdown here through Zoom and the
telephone, and I have been observing
bears, and they went through a
harder lockdown, and now they are
mainly recovered and getting about
their own lives. A good question
about hospitality, because there are
restrictions about people travelling
restrictions about peopla travelling
abroad,
restrictions about people travelling
abroad, and lots of hotels are now
fully booked from local people
fully booked from [oral peopla
travelling,
fully booked from local people
travelling, trying to make the most
in the country itself, so I fully
echo what Devi is saying, that there
is no conflict in balancing public
is no conﬂict in balancing public
health
is no conflict in balancing public
health and the economy. Elliott. It
was just to add to some of the
points that Kieran made about the
failures of testing. I think a large
part of the failure is with the
privatisation of testing. We talk
about NHS testing but, in many
uses,
cases, it isn’t the NHS who are
rases, it isn’t the NHS who are
testing. A
cases, it isn’t the NHS who are
testing. A family friend had to pay
£175 to get a test and they did have
coronavirus. If they were not in a
position to pay, that would have
been somebody who would not have
been able to get access to a test
otherwise it would have been going
out in society unaware they had
coronavirus. So
coronavirus. Sojust
out in society unaware they had
coronavirus. So just adding to that
and mentioning the impact of
privatisation on testing as well. No
government wants to be cast in the
government wants to be fast in the
role of
government wants to be cast in the
role of the Grinch, obviously, and
rola of the Grinch, obviously, and
Boris johnson
role of the Grinch, obviously, and
BorisJohnson said he very much
Boris johnson said he very much
hopes things
BorisJohnson said he very much
hopes things could get, that we can
hopes things could get, that we ran
get together
hopes things could get, that we can
get together at Christmas, but he
can’t promise. When you listen to
can’t promise. when you listen to
Linda, who
can’t promise. When you listen to
Linda, who obviously has a massive
family, congratulations, but the
idea of getting altogether at the
moment, if the will of six
continues, is a nonstarter. I
continues, is a nonstarter. Iwould
like [cad
like lead and all of us to enjoy
time with our
time with ourfamilies
like lead and all of us to enjoy
time with our families at Christmas,
but let’s go back to where we are
now compared to March. We are in a
quite different place because of the
action is the government has taken,
and because lots of people have
and because lots of peopla have
shown
and because lots of people have
shown an enormous amount of common
sense. We have managed the months to
get this under control and to open
“P
up the economy in a big way. You
have seen in the last few months the
economy started to recover, consumer
confidence returning. Is do you
think coronavirus is under control
in this
think coronavims is under control
in this country?
think coronavirus is under control
in this country? Cross infection
rates have been rising so we have
introduced new measures that people
to follow them. What I am concerned
to follow them. what I am concerned
about is
to follow them. What I am concerned
about is when I hear from
about is when I hearfrom Louise
to follow them. What I am concerned
about is when I hear from Louise and
Ed this constant criticism. Of
course, we should be held to account
and we should get things right, but
when Louise’s colleague, the Shadow
Education Secretary, talked about
the fact that Labour shouldn’t miss
the fact that labour shouldn’t miss
out on a good
the fact that Labour shouldn’t miss
out on a good crisis, that is really
quite unacceptable. This is a global
pandemic and we all need to work
together, we want to see
constructive opposition, not people
constructive opposition, not peopla
just carping
constructive opposition, not people
just carping from the sidelines.
That isn’t what the public wants. I
think that is really unfair on the
labour Party
Labour Party and the opposition
labour Party and the opposition
first up we
Labour Party and the opposition
first up we have been supportive of
the government on many measures. It
is our
is ourjob to hold you to account
when you make mistakes and everybody
knows you are making a real mistake
in the test entries. The facts are
there for the Alan’s point about
elderty
elderly people may be suffering from
elderty peopla may be suffering from
mental
elderly people may be suffering from
mental health. If you look at our
rare homes,
care homes, there are a lot of
rare homes, there are a lot of
people with
care homes, there are a lot of
people with dementia who, because
rare
care homes haven’t had the testing
rare homes haven’t had the testing
for their
care homes haven’t had the testing
for their staff and residents and
visitors, some of those elderly
visitors, some of those elderty
peopla,
visitors, some of those elderly
people, their conditions have
worsened. This is the impact of not
getting testing right, it is
affecting many people.
ﬂ
I want to get a question from Alex
Buckmaster.
Why can I return from a foreign
holiday, quarantine and see my
family at Christmas,
but not from university?
I’m going to come to Devi, events
have happened in Scotland today,
hundreds, over
hundreds, over1000
have happened in Scotland today,
hundreds, over 1000 at least student
self isolating in universities in
Scotland and also some in Liverpool
and possibly elsewhere by now and
what we are hearing is that because
of the rules in Scotland, different
households not mixing, students at
universities in Scotland cannot go
home. They may not go home for
Christmas. What is going on? I can
Christmas. what is going on? I ran
only speak
Christmas. What is going on? I can
only speakfrom
only speak from the perspective of
pub“:
public health which is we have seen
this scenario in the United States
over the past eight weeks, a lot of
students came back, movement of
peopla across
people across the country and the
peopla across the country and the
world
people across the country and the
world into cramped student living,
which is hard to keep separate with
shared bathrooms and kitchens and
adding on top of that, you have
students who want to socialise and
they are least likely to comply with
mles
rules which they feel are
restrictive on them. Let me ask you
as a global public health expert,
given how quickly this has happened,
Scottish universities have been back
for a fortnight, do you think they
should have come back at all? I
think they should have only come
back under strict guidelines, I did
in Article eight weeks ago where I
asked for testing on arrival and
after five days to catch all cases,
regular testing on campuses and
ventilation and bubbling and all the
different measures you would have in
place to make the campus Covid safe
and it just
and itjust seems and all I guess I
and it just seems and all I guess I
ran do as
and itjust seems and all I guess I
can do as an the Adamic is lay but I
ran do as an the Adamic is lay but I
think will help
can do as an the Adamic is lay but I
think will help them to go back
safely. We have got some students
amongst our audience. Let us hear
from Sinem. You are starting your
first year. I would just like to
say,
5“- young
first year. I would just like to
say, young people like myself, are
say, young peopla like myself, are
being
say, young people like myself, are
being blamed for this second spike
in Covid—19 and hearing for example
in Covid-19 and hearing for example
Matt
in Covid—19 and hearing for example
Matt Hancock making a condescending
comment on, do not kill your grandma
by matching
by catching coronavirus and passing
by matching coronavirus and passing
it on, it’s very
by catching coronavirus and passing
it on, it’s very frustrating,
because the use have been instructed
because the use have been instmcted
to Eat Out
because the use have been instructed
to Eat Out To Help Out, told to go
back to school and that is exactly
what we have done, but we are still
the ones being blamed. Tia. You’re
starting your first as well. Yes, I
am starting my first year as well
and I have been told that
universities are returning for the
mental health of young people and I
understand that and it is important,
but the fact is that we are
returning to university physically
for four hours,
forfour hours, I have eight hours
for four hours, I have eight hours
of lassons
forfour hours, I have eight hours
of lessons 3 week, four of which are
face—to—face and basically I am
face-to-face and basically I am
going and
face—to—face and basically I am
going and exposing myself to so many
other people from different parts of
the country, being brought together,
sharing a kitchen, I know that some
of the holes share a kitchen and
toilets with ten people, we are
being asked to come together for
essentially four face—to—face awake
essentially four face-to-face awake
and we
essentially four face—to—face awake
and we are not allowed to socialise
and I do not think it is massively
beneficial for our mental health
either, especially now. I am
either, especially now. lam being
told that if I go to university I
may not be able to go home for
Christmas and that leaves me with
the decision, do I save my mental
health now which apparently going to
university well, or do I stay away
so that I can stay with my family
so that I ran stay with my family
and see
so that I can stay with my family
and see people more often than just
and see peopla more often thanjust
four hours
and see people more often than just
four hours a week and be at home for
Christmas? Those are horrible
decisions that you are having to
make and I feel for you
make and Ifeel for you hearing
make and I feel for you hearing
that.
make and Ifeel for you hearing
that. Louise, Labour has supported
that. Louise, labour has supported
the
that. Louise, Labour has supported
the government in trying to make
sure that education continues and
seeing what is happening more in
Scotland, Scotland is ahead of
England, particularly, is this the
England, particularty, is this the
right
England, particularly, is this the
right approach? It would have been
incredibly constructive for the
government and I have attempted to
support them and how to tackle the
support them and how to tackla the
virus
support them and how to tackle the
virus because it is not good for the
pub“:
public to hear that. In terms of
universities. We supported schools
reopening. We want to see students
going back to university, but with
millions of students moving across
the country, it was always going,
there was always going to be
increased demand for testing, there
needed to be clear guidance in order
to make campuses Covid secure and
there needed to be a proper Track
and Trace system underpinning that.
Given that we are where we are, do
you think it is right that students,
we are not sure what will happen in
England but students in Scotland
will not be able to go home. It is
grossly unfair to tell students they
ran
can return to university... I do not
ran return to university... I do not
think it is right
can return to university... I do not
think it is right that we are asking
them to return to university, the
first time living away from home and
then being told they cannot
socialise and potentially not return
home to their families. Tia said it
is about improving mental health and
I think that will be deteriorating
for it. It is really tough on the
students and let us remember there
was an added problem for them and
the universities, because of the way
the government mishandled the exam
system, they ended up having to
allow more people to be able to go
allow more peopla to be able to go
to university
allow more people to be able to go
to university and that was very late
in the day. Universities have
stmggled,
struggled, they have massive
financial problems, to make their
financial problams, to make their
rampuses
financial problems, to make their
campuses and accommodation Covid
secure and then there was a massive
increase in students because of the
incompetence over the A—level
incompetence over the A-level
system. The
incompetence over the A—level
system. The government have made it
even more difficult for
universities, even more difficult
for students and again, I do not see
them take an action, giving more
support to universities who are
having to struggle with S. Alok,
this has got public health
implications and you cannot
implications and you cannotjust
implications and you cannot just
allow
implications and you cannotjust
allow universities and students to
fend for themselves, they need
support and I do not see why they
are not getting it. A number of
points there. I am not an expert in
education but I think it is clear
that young people, there was always
that young peopla, there was always
going to be
that young people, there was always
going to be transmission and it is
whether you are off the view that it
is better to be safe and they are a
long way from Granny and you could
argue that this is the time for them
to get it, but the point is that
students go elsewhere. There needs
to be a plan and I think schools
have a problem. I got a letter,
sorry, an e-mail
sorry, an e—mail today, from a guy
sorry, an e-mail today, from a guy
who sits on
sorry, an e—mail today, from a guy
who sits on the parents, he is on
the Board of Governors, and he was
making the point that he has got
teachers having to do Covid claims
and they are struggling to stay on
and they are stmggling to stay on
top and to
and they are struggling to stay on
top and to deliver teaching at home
for kids that cannot attend and they
need more resources. I was able to
pay for extra cleaning and extra
measures, because I am a business
and I think maybe it might help if
the government could look at how
they could support, to work out the
right protocol and provide funding
for schools and universities to help
them deliver that kind of safe
environment. 50, Alok, what is the
environment. So, Alok, what is the
plan? If there
environment. 50, Alok, what is the
plan? If there has been an outbreak
in Liverpool, 87 cases, if we see in
England what
in Liverpool, 87 rases, if we see in
England what is
in Liverpool, 87 cases, if we see in
England what is happening in
Scotland, what is the plan? I will
acknowledge, it has been a tough
time for young people. I have two
time for young peopla. I have two
daughters
time for young people. I have two
daughters who are of university age
and it has been very tough. There is
the point about making sure that
students are able to go to
university, younger children to be
in school, I think that is really
important for their mental health
and well—being and important in
and well-being and important in
terms of
and well—being and important in
terms of their development. We are
working with the university sector
to ensure that they have the advice
in terms of keeping premises safe...
(“an you see a
Can you see a situation happening in
(“an you see a situation happening in
England like in
Can you see a situation happening in
England like in Scotland, where
university students are not allowed
to go home? Not allowed to go to the
pub? I hope we do not get to that,
but that does require... Is that in
your planning? We have always said
and we set it right from the start
of this pandemic, we keep all
options on the table and under
review. Point now is that we want
people to follow the rules and the
people to follow the mles and the
guidance
people to follow the rules and the
guidance that we put in place now
and if they do that, we will be able
to get under control. You were a
fresh ones! How realistic is it to
expect people going away from home
for the first time to university to
stay two metres away from literally
everyone? It is of course very
difficult, but from what I have
observed, young people are very
responsible and they understand the
reason that we asked people to
follow the guidance on the rails and
going back to the support for
universities, we are making
financial support available and
obviously they will have less
obviously they will have lass
foreign
obviously they will have less
foreign students coming and that
support is being provided on this
idea that we are somehow leaving the
sector unsupported, that is not
fair. Max,
fair. Alex, what do you think of
fair. Max, what do you think of
what you have
fair. Alex, what do you think of
what you have heard? I think what
Alok said about going to university
helping your mental health, may not
going home for Christmas is so much
worse than we going to university.
So much worse than you not going to
university? I would
university? Iwould have
So much worse than you not going to
university? Iwould havejust
university? I would have just stayed
university? Iwould have just stayed
at home
university? I would have just stayed
at home and on all of my course
onUne
online which I am basically doing
anyway, I
anyway, lam having
online which I am basically doing
anyway, I am having all but two
hours of online lectures and I could
have stayed at home and had
Christmas with my family. I am the
only son, my dad has cancer, they
have had such a difficult year and
now for them to know, they knew the
risk of higher education and
infection and for them to say, there
is a chance you will miss Christmas,
after all they have been through, it
is unacceptable. Alex, I hope that
does not happen and I am terribly
sorry about your father as well. And
Tia and Sinem, good luck with this.
RR is up and I think we could talk
about this for quite sometime and
tonight all our questions came from
Chingford and next week we will have
our virtual audience from Carlisle
our virtual audience from (“artisla
and
our virtual audience from (“artisle
and the
our virtual audience from Carlisle
and the week after that we will be
in Coventry and if you live in the
cities or in the area around them
please get in touch because we
really want to hear what you have
got to say. I think the next few
weeks will be interesting and
challenging. You can apply by going
challanging. You ran apply by going
to the
challenging. You can apply by going
to the website and follow the
instructions there. We would love to
instmctions there. We would love to
hear from you.
instructions there. We would love to
hear from you. Adrian Chiles and
guests are on Radio Five Live now
with Question Time Extra Time and
you ran see
you can see how to get in touch on
you ran see how to get in touch on
screen now.
you can see how to get in touch on
screen now. For now, thank you very
much to our panel for coming here
tonight. Devi, thank you for
tonight. Devi, thank you forjoining
tonight. Devi, thank you for joining
us down
tonight. Devi, thank you forjoining
us down the line and thank you to
our audience in Chingford for
joining in the programme and thank
you to you as always for watching.
From Question Time, goodbye.
MUSIC: 0 Fortune
by Orff
PHONE RINGS
Yes, Lord Sugar. Could you send
the candidates in, please?
Relive the very best of
The Apprentice
from the past 15 years.
You couldn’t sell a bone
to Battersea Dogs Home!
All the candidates...
HE SPITS
Get out of the way!
..all the celebrities...
Whoa!
..and all the Karren
and Claude—isms.
What do you think you’re
coming here for? You can leave.
Can you believe it?
Brilliant, brilliant goal.
De Bruyne hammers it!
Oh, my goodness!
Oh, what drama!
Sela. Superb.
That is simply awesome.
Kane...
What a goal!
And that certainly
wasn’t in the script.
Drama like no other.
I lost half of my family
because of some person’s hate.
BBC TWO searches with families
looking for justice.